Here's a checker program that runs libgretl against the NIST reference
datasets for linear regression, for details on which see

http://www.nist.gov/itl/div898/strd/general/main.html

If all is well there should be exactly one failure, namely libgretl
will not be able to obtain estimates on the Filip model (a 10th degree
polynomial which exhibits very high collinearity).  Any other failures
should be cause for concern.

The checker program reads the "certified values" and data out of each
NIST file, runs a regression using libgretl, and compares the libgretl
estimates with the certified values, starting at a precision of 9
significant figures.  If there is any disagreement, the comparison is
repeated using 8 significant figures, and so on.  If the figures do
not agree at a precision of at least 6 figures, the test is deemed to
have been failed and an error message is printed.

You can get more details on gretl's performance on the tests by
running the 'nistcheck' program in verbose mode (-v flag) or very
verbose mode (-vv).  

If the Gnu Multiple Precision library (GMP) was detected when gretl
was configured, and gretl's GMP plugin was built, then the NIST tests
will be repeated using the multiple precision plugin.  In this case
the Filip model should be estimated without difficulty.  All tests
should produce results that agree with the NIST certified values to at
least 12 significant figures, apart from the "Wampler2" data set.  

In Wampler2 the dependent variable is expressible as an exact 5th
degree polynomial in the independent variable.  Gretl with the GMP
plugin does not reproduce the exact fit (the coefficients should be
right to at least 12 figures, but the error sum of squares is not
exactly zero).  The problem here lies not in the calculations but in
the precision with which the data are read in the first place.  To get
the exact results one would need a statistical program entirely
implemented in multiple precision, as opposed to gretl's GMP plugin
which just does the regression calculations in multiple precision.

Allin Cottrell
August 2002
