This directory contains the mechanism for auto-generating the 
gretl "online" helpfiles and the command reference section of the
gretl manual, from an XML "database" of gretl commands,
gretl_commands.xml.

----------

skeleton.c makes a program called "skeleton", which goes through the
full list of gretl commands (from libgretl) and outputs a skeleton XML
command reference.  Mostly this is blank, but it contain a mostly
correct listing of the options available in connection with each
command (if any), again taken from libgretl.

The output of skeleton is directed to skeleton.xml, an xml file that
should validate in relation to the gretl command reference DTD,
gretl_commands.dtd.  This could provide a basis for a translation.  It
is designed as a purely content-oriented "database" for the gretl
command reference.

xsltrans.c makes a program called "xsltrans", which parses an XML
command listing such as skeleton.xml and uses XSL to transform the
information.  The program is small and uses libxml and  libxsl to
do most of the work.  Depending on how it is invoked (see the
Makefile), xsltrans outputs:

* command reference and functions reference files in TeX, which
  are designed for inclusion in the full PDF manual; 

* gretlcli.hlp, a plain text scripts commands help file for use
  with the command-line client program, gretlcli; 

* gretlcmd.hlp, a version of the above using markup, for display
  int the GUI program; and

* gretlgui.hlp, the GUI-specific "online" help file 

xsltrans uses the three XSL stylesheets, gretltxt.xsl, gretlhlp.xsl
and gretltex.xsl.  The text stylesheet leaves a certain amount of work
undone, and it is supplemented by a C post-processor (see reflow.c,
which is used to make the "reflow" program.)  

You may have to edit the Makefile before doing anything else.  
Once that's ready, try:

make test

and take a look at the output: skeleton.xml.

Most of the "make" targets in here are activated by doing "make"
in other directories.  To make the help files (plain text and with
markup), do "make help" in the toplevel "share" directory.  To
make the PDF User's Guide and Reference, do "make" in doc/tex
(or doc/tex_it).

-----------

validate.c makes a program, "validate", which checks a command
reference database such as gretl_commands.xml against libgretl.  It
flags any command which are present in the library but not the
reference database, and vice versa.  It also checks (imperfectly) for
disagreement between the options recognized as valid by libgretl and
those appearing in the reference.

Allin Cottrell, January 2008
